ZHA troubleshooting Zigbee OTA upgrades of device firmware (#35884)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_integrations/zha.markdown

  - Place your Zigbee Coordinator away from any Wi-Fi access points and all other sources of WiFi.
  - Wi-Fi frequency ranges can overlap with Zigbee, see the section above on defining Zigbee channel use.

### Problems upgrading Zigbee device firmware via OTA

> Be aware that OTAU (Over-The-Air Upgrade) of Zigbee devices typically takes around 10 minutes. While a device is updating a lot of traffic is generated on the network, therefore it is recommended to not execute multiple updates at the same time. Always check that battery-powered devices have at least 70% of battery-life left before starting a firmware upgrade (a general tip is therefore to simply put new fresh batteries in before upgrading any OTA firmware upgrade), OTA updating of firmware is very power-consuming and while some devices do check for a minimum battery-level before starting the upgrade and might refuse to update unless have enough battery-life left, not all do so.

Reviewer: > therefore it is recommended to not execute multiple updates at the same time.

This is not something we should burden our users with. If this is an issue it should be fixed.

Reviewer: > Always check that battery-powered devices have at least 70% of battery-life left before starting a firmware upgrade

Same.

Author: >> therefore it is recommended to not execute multiple updates at the same time.
>> 
> This is not something we should burden our users with. If this is an issue it should be fixed.

OK. Now updated these OTA troubleshooting tips based on feedback. FYI, I have removed the advice for users to check battery level themselves and instead submitted a feature request as an issue to to the zha/zigpy project requesting that a such feature is added, see ->  https://github.com/zigpy/zha/issues/301

> If Zigbee firmware upgrades do not start on a battery-powered product then be aware that you usually need to "wake up the device" so that will will be able to receive commands, (because battery-powered products are sleepy devices so they normally only receive commands when the state of the device is changed). If the upgrade still does not start then try restarting the device by disconnecting the power/battery for a few seconds and try again, again make sure to activate the device by pressing a button on it right before sending the update request. Try to push a button on the device (if it has one) shortly before you start the firmware update to wake it up. Sometimes it also helps to try keeping the device awake by pushing a button repeatedly until you see the first "Updating... " message in the user interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If Zigbee firmware upgrades do not start on a battery-powered product, then be aware that you usually need to "wake up the device" so that it will be able to receive commands (because battery-powered products are sleepy devices, so they normally only receive commands when the state of the device is changed). If the upgrade still does not start, then try restarting the device by disconnecting the power/battery for a few seconds and try again; make sure to activate the device by pressing a button on it right before sending the update request. Try to push a button on the device (if it has one) shortly before you start the firmware update to wake it up. Sometimes, it also helps to try keeping the device awake by repeatedly pushing a button until you see the first "Updating... " message in the user interface.
```

> Another common reason for Zigbee firmware upgrades not starting or failing is poor reception or not having a stable Zigbee network mesh. Take some basic actions to try to optimize your Zigbee network by avoiding radio frequency interference and adding many Zigbee Router devices (repeaters/extenders) to extend range and coverage. Try to follow all the best practice tips above in the [Zigbee interference avoidance and network range/coverage optimization)](#zigbee-interference-avoidance-and-network-rangecoverage-optimization) section under troubleshooting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another common reason for Zigbee firmware upgrades not starting or failing is poor reception or not having a stable Zigbee network mesh. Take action to try to optimize your Zigbee network by avoiding radio frequency interference and adding many Zigbee Router devices (repeaters/extenders) to extend range and coverage. Try to follow all the best practice tips above in the [Zigbee interference avoidance and network range/coverage optimization)](#zigbee-interference-avoidance-and-network-rangecoverage-optimization) section under troubleshooting.
```

If Zigbee firmware upgrades do not start on a Zigbee End Device (i.e. a battery-powered product), then note that you usually need to "wake up the device" (e.g. trigger state change or pressing a button if available) so that the device becomes awake and are thus able to receive commands to start the OTA upgrade. The reason for this is that battery-powered products are so called "sleepy devices", so they normally they are askeep and only receive commands when the state of the device is changed.

If the upgrade still does not start, then try manually restarting the device by disconnecting the power/battery for a few seconds and try again; then again make sure to activate the device by triggering state change or pressing a button on it right before sending the update request. Try to push a button on the device (if it has one) shortly before you start the firmware update to wake it up. Sometimes, it also helps to try keeping the device awake by repeatedly pushing a button pr triggering state change until you see the first "Updating... " message in the user interface.

> Be aware that OTAU (Over-The-Air Upgrade) of Zigbee devices typically takes around 10 minutes per device, if it takes longer then another common reason for Zigbee firmware upgrades not starting, taking a very long time, or even failing, is poor reception or not having a stable Zigbee network mesh. Take action to try to optimize your Zigbee network by avoiding radio frequency interference and adding many Zigbee Router devices (repeaters/extenders) to extend range and coverage. Try to follow all the best practice tips above in the [Zigbee interference avoidance and network range/coverage optimization)](#zigbee-interference-avoidance-and-network-rangecoverage-optimization) section under troubleshooting.

Author: Can not change URL
